The Aspirations Committee has appointed faculty and staff to recommend what A&M ought to aspire to be in 1976, the 100th anniversary year.
And they recommend coeducation, non-compulsory core, and so forth.
Were you at all involved in any of that effort?
Were you on any of those committees?
Well, it seemed like I was on, had a minor role on some of those committees.
I was not a chair of any of those committees.
What was the, as far as you and your colleagues, what opinion did you all have about any of those changes?
Well, I think we were nearly all very much in favor of it.
I don't remember any opposition to that at all.
And, of course, we were in a field where, that we would be affected a lot by having women students.
And we were ready for it.
We were willing to do it.
All right, among the first changes that came as a result of that was the admission of black students.
And you said that that touched you.
Please describe that in as great a detail as you can.
Well, this was earlier, I think, than the 70s.
Oh, this early 60s.
Yeah, somewhere in there.
I remember it was right after they had that big story about over in
blacks trying to enter University of Alabama and the governor was out there to block it.
There was just lots of publicity about that on TV and everything.
And then I found out that my class, a survey course in
general psychology, he was about 75 in that class, he was going to meet on a Monday morning, meet five days a week for an hour and a half, and it was in an academic building, and that it would have two black students, a man and a woman, and they were to be the first undergraduate black students ever to attend A&M.
There hadn't been graduate students before.
And since this was right after that case over in Alabama that was so famous,
Am I right about it being Alabama?
I thought, well, maybe there'll be TV cameras there, or maybe the newspaper will be there.
But nobody cared at all.
There was not any excitement about it at all.
It happened to be a little larger class than usual for that
for those days it was about, every seat was occupied in one of the larger, it was about 70 maybe in there, 60 or 70, which was all that room would contain, and the two black people and then the 68 or so, 60-some odd white students.
You know, there just wasn't anything to it.
I just taught my class.
How did you learn they were going to be in that class?
It was in the newspaper, but it wasn't blown up just real big.
And I might have been told, I think I was told by, you know, we register all, we see everybody who registers in those days.
They come around to your table and register.
So it was well known that they would be there.
Did you see anything?
relating to their being in that class by anybody else?
Not at all.
I was really pleasantly surprised, you know.
I thought there'd be at least a little excitement about it or I didn't expect any real trouble, you know, but I thought there would be a little bit of disturbance or excitement or...
These were undergraduate.
They were undergraduates.
And they were not a husband and wife?
No, they were not.
And it happened that the man I knew slightly.
His name was Dunn, and he worked over in the MSC as a shoeshine man.
And I had met him.
I guess he'd probably shine my shoes.
And everybody knew him.
A lot of people knew him.
And he was one of them.
I don't know if he ever graduated from A.M.M.
or not.
What about the woman?
Do you know?
I can't remember her name, but she was very... made a nice appearance, nice manners.
She was...
about maybe a little above the usual age for an undergraduate student, but not much, you know, maybe about 21, 22 years old.
And neither of them did anything special to come up to talk to you after the class was over or anything like that?
No.
I called the roll and they said, here.
They didn't even say, here.
And did, as far as you recall, they did okay academically?
Yes.
Okay is the right word.
Yeah.
All right.
See, there were a few that summer, a few black students that were here because Earl Rudder called the Pentagon
and told them when they sent that summer's group of Army enlisted men at Army expense, send a few, include a few black students.
All right, then that fall when we were back
to the normal enrollment, do you remember any problems regarding racial integration?
You know, after that, I didn't even notice it, Haskell.
The first time was noticeable, you know, but after that, I think having black students was rare.
You know, they were very much in the minority.
But I never thought much about it, and neither did my other students, and it was no longer even an event.
And most of the time I couldn't tell you.
You know, if you'd ask me during the semester, do you have any black students, I'd have to stop and think.
Now, we'd always had women in summer school here.
but at about that time we had women for the first time in the two long semesters.
Do you remember women in class for the first time in the long semesters?
Was there any difference there?
No.
That transition was very smooth.
I can see why you would ask that, but I didn't notice it.
I didn't notice much.
How long before?
I heard people say, and I kind of noticed it myself, just an informal observation, that people started working a little harder on their books and started being a little more interested in academics when women came.
You mean the students?
Right.
Part of that might just be talk, you know, but I do believe there is something to that.
I think that it started to...
It became more competitive.
I believe it did.
I don't have any figures on that, but that was a general impression that I heard a lot of people say, and I didn't find any reason to contradict that.
Do you agree with my theory that racial integration among the students went more smoothly here
than the admission and enrollment of women.
That in some areas of the corps and so forth, it wasn't easy to be the first female, but there never was any problem being the first black that I knew of.
There was not any problem being the first black.
There was not any, and I think there were some, I heard some criticism, nothing violent
or varied and didn't amount to too much.
But I did hear some kind of cynicism about women coming, but I had never heard that about blacks.
And I think that was partly because it was just time.
If it had happened a year or two earlier, there might have been.
But when it happened, there just was not any problem in that transition.
Now, in the late 60s, what was happening to enrollment numbers in your classes and in education in general?
It didn't affect me much.
Your classes didn't get larger?
We had more classes, but the classes weren't larger.
We had more faculty, so it didn't really affect me much that way.
But the place did get bigger.
Oh yes, the campus got much more crowded and I saw lots more people and lots more traffic and parking started becoming a problem where it was absolutely no problem at all.
And I noticed those, but as far as classes,
All through my entire teaching career, I just taught my classes, you know.
Where did you teach, where did you park in the earliest years?
Where was your parking place?
Well, right adjacent, north of the academic building was a parking lot, and I just parked there, didn't pay anything, just parked there.
I did happen to have very excellent parking all the time I was here.
I was fortunate in that regard.
And I don't know whether we even locked our cars in those early years.
I always did, but people kidded me.
Oh, how silly to lock your car, but I always did.
City slicker from Austin locking your car, they would say.
Did you and your colleagues feel that A&M was moving forward in the late 60s?
Progress in Bing May?
Yes, we did.
Then were you aware that
Mr. Rutter dies in early 1970.
Were you and your colleagues aware of any health problems that he had?
No, I was very shocked by that.
I didn't expect that.
He died pretty young, you know, and I was really surprised.
I think that he had
He had moved on Lee Street, which is close to where I live.
I live right at the end of Lee Street.
And I believe he was living there at the time of his death.
And I was very surprised and shocked and sad about that.
You want to guess how old he was?
Uh-huh.
I think he was definitely in his 50s, maybe 57, 58, right along in there.
One month short of his 60th birthday.
Is that right?
Which means, as a reservist, he did not qualify for veterans benefits upon his death.
And even his classmate, Olin Teague, chairman of the House Veterans Affairs Committee, could not get it changed.
Just a few months short, huh?
Yeah.
Then that fall, 1970, Jack Williams becomes our president.
What impression did he make upon you and others quickly?
Oh, I was very much impressed and liked him, and I remember that big convocation.
I've never been much for a ceremony, but that was really a nice ceremony that everybody seemed to like.
What was impressive about him?
What made such a good
positive feeling?
Well, he spoke real well.
He had a good way of expressing himself and good vocabulary and things like that.
Did you all think of him as an academic?
Yes, very much so.
I didn't know much about him before.
I just didn't have any reason to.
But as soon as I heard about him, and so met him, and saw him, and interacted with him a little, well, I was very much impressed by his academic credentials.
And I remember thinking that as much as I admired General Rutter, that he was probably a little bit
better for running an organization like this at that stage of its development, you know, after Rutter had done so much to get it to that stage.
I imagine Rutter would have done real well at any stage, but I do remember having that feeling.
I tell people, Rutter couldn't have done what Williams did, and Williams couldn't have done what Rutter did, because Williams politically would have gotten shot down.
Oh, you're not an Aggie.
You're wanting to change the court and admit women, da, da, da, da, da.
But Mr.
Rudder didn't have the know-how about all these new graduate programs and so forth.
Now, education by then is growing and growing.
Did you all feel you were part of something that was happening?
Oh, yes.
And let's see, Paul Hensling by then, was he, when the College of Education was created, describe the department that you were in.
I was in the Department of Educational Psychology, and Art Roach was our first department head, and he's a counseling psychologist.
Where did he come from?
Well, he had already been here several years, but he, well, his Ph.D. is from Notre Dame, and I don't know, he might have taught at Louisiana State or maybe it's Tulane or somewhere over there.
I'm not sure, but he had already been here several years when that
About how big was the department when it was created, the faculty?
Faculty.
We had probably more faculty in that department than we'd had in the whole education and psychology faculty when I first came.
We had probably about, maybe about eight.
And the College of Education?
And of course we were entirely graduate.
We taught some courses for undergraduates
in like psychology of learning and a few things like that.
And I taught one test and measurement for undergraduate, but all of our majors were graduate students.
And always have been.
All right.
As things got into high gear, describe the typical students in that program.
Where did they, had they done their undergraduate?
Where did they come from and so forth?
Well, we, of course we got some of our own graduates, but we got them from all over Texas, every college in Texas.
And it wasn't long before we were getting them from all around the United States and then we got some foreign students too, international students coming in.
Were they experienced already in education?
Often they were.
Yes, they nearly all, of course they, well a few came in directly from
previous graduate work into the doctoral program.
But a typical student had been in some kind of educational work, teaching or some other education or administration or some other educational work for a few years at least.
And some were middle-aged or
It wasn't unusual for me in those about the first half of my career to have students older than I was.
Then they started getting younger.
Now were most of these that were experienced were coming out of elementary and secondary or were there some college?
Some college all along.
Okay.
Just a mixture, quite a mixture it was.
What other programs in the state were y'all like?
I think we were, well of course we were like Texas a lot.
some of the very same kinds of things that Texas had.
I think North Texas.
And East Texas had always been kind of strong in counseling.
And they were kind of like we were.
And of course, by that time, we had had a lot of experience in putting out counselors with master's degrees and some beyond master's degree, but not a doctoral program.
Texas Tech.
And I guess that was about it.
Were there?
I had lots of students, by the way, from Sam Houston.
Not necessarily majoring with us, but taking my statistics courses and techniques of research and computer work and things like that.
Right.
As things were in high gear in the 70s and 80s, describe what it was like to
What was a typical day or week like for a full-time, full professor in educational psychology?
Well, like I said, I managed to get myself on lots of student committees.
And there were times, especially in the summer, because we had a lot of students who would come for summer.
They'd be doing other things during the year.
So it was more so in the summer.
It wouldn't be unusual for me to have
It was not too unusual for me to have four, and not at all unusual for me to have three committee meetings a day, and they would be always two hours.
So I would spend six to eight hours a day in committee meetings, hard on the bottom.
Because this included such things as
program planning with the committee, dissertation proposal, final exam, final exam for the master's students.
And each one of those took two hours, no matter what you did.
It always take up the whole full two hours.
And you're also teaching how much?
In the summer, I usually was teaching six hours.
No, I was teaching, yeah, that's right, six hours, three hours each term.
In those days, earlier, I was teaching more.
And then in those days, in the long semester, how much?
I'd be teaching nine semester hours.
Three preps, three different preparations?
Yes, usually.
And so you'd get to campus at about what time?
Take me through a typical day.
I always arrived before 8.
Never was any parking problem either.
And not much before 8, but I was always here at 8.
I always took off some time in the middle of the day to go to the gym.
I did that throughout the time here, and I still do.
And what did you do?
Most of the time we played badminton.
With?
Charles McCandless and Carl Landis and Lynn Hanna and Jim Melton and Ed McWilliams.
Singles, doubles, or what?
Yes, both of those.
Both?
Mixed.
Who was your favorite partner?
Well, during many of those years, and especially later, Len Hanna was my best friend.
And we played millions of badminton games and got to be real good friends on other bases, too, finally.
By the way, Monday was the fourth anniversary of his death.
He was in entomology department, 10 years older than I am.
And of course, Charles McCandless, he taught me quite a bit about playing.
And Barney Welch played with us some.
And Carl Landis played with us.
Now, this was over in an old... G. Raleigh White on the third floor.
Oh, it was in G. Raleigh.
Until the new rec center was built.
And then we moved over there.
And we're still, I'm still, but I'm not playing now.
I have knee surgery.
In those years, normally, what time of day did you do that?
I would take off, I would try to not have any appointment before two.
And I would be over there, you know, on the way over there and on the way back or showering.
or playing from twelve to two.
One time I asked Len, did he remember where he was when Kennedy was shot?
He said, I was the same place you were, playing badminton on the third floor of G. Riley White.
We learned about it after we got it back on the street.
Oh, another partner of mine was Tony Sorenson.
He died young.
Now of your close group of badminton players, who was the best?
Who was the best, the hardest to beat?
Okay, well Charles McCandless was really an excellent player, a real good, best player.
And later on, a little later than that, I don't know if you know, Cheryl Smith in chemistry.
Real good player.
And then we always had some Asian students that would play with us.
And they were, the ones that played with us were very good.
They go in for badminton more in Asia than they do here.
And I was pretty good too, Haskell.
Okay.
You got to the campus by eight.
in your teaching class and then in your office?
I would go home about 5 o'clock, unless I had a night class, and then I stayed on until after 8 p.m. What about lunch?
Where'd you eat lunch?
I usually didn't.
Really?
I just, but I maintained a large body weight all that time.
I just ate a lot when I finally did get home.
I usually kept some things like, you remember Metrical?
I had some of those wafers.
And I would eat things like that.
No, I didn't eat lunch, no.
So you got a typical weekday you'd get home what time?
About 6 o'clock, 5.30 to 6 o'clock.
Didn't do much work at home.
Usually, sometimes I had to.
So evening after supper you could relax.
That's right.
There were times when I couldn't.
When children were growing up, when they were in junior and senior high, what did family do for enjoyment?
We stayed at home most of the time.
We were all readers.
We would sit around and read and tell each other what we were reading.
We watched TV quite a bit.
Movies, picnicking?
Some of that, yes.
We weren't big on that.
What kinds of vacations were you all able to work on?
We had very few vacations.
During a lot of this time, my wife was in poor health.
which she still is, and it was hard for her to travel.
And that contributed to our not being on vacation.
Of course, my teaching 12 months a year contributed to that, too.
What would you... We visited family in Waco quite a bit.
What evaluation would you give in hindsight of the A&M Consolidated School District while your children, based on the years they were there?
Well, I was entirely satisfied with it.
I would agree with you.
And I think the Bryan School District has been good most of the time, too.
I have two grandchildren that are now in Bryan High School and have gone all through the Bryan Schools.
And I think they have an excellent education.
Did you go to, back in those years when the kids were at home, did you all go to football, basketball games?
Not until they got kind of older, and then by then they were doing other things, so didn't do too much.
Never did do much of that.
Some, but never did do much of that.
Were you part, was commencement normal for you to attend?
No, I usually found a way out of that.
In fact, a lot of years, when it was compulsory,
I got a job in the registrar's office of helping them line up, and then I left.
So I was kind of a shirker on that.
Oh, describe registration, academic registration in the olden days.
Oh, that was amazing.
I really missed that.
But we would all be in one big room, either Duncan Hall or Sabeza Hall.
Every department would have a table.
And people would come around, and they would register for your courses, and it would all be done by hand.
It was on punch cards, but that was a really amazing day.
And it was all done in one day, or half a day.
And they would just go around and pick up their cards for the classes they want to register.
And if you had any questions from one department to another about prerequisites or something like that or the qualifications for a person to enroll in a course, you'd just yell across there, hey, can this guy get in a history course or something like that.
Did it work?
Did it function?
It did work.
It was chaos.
I mean, it seemed like chaos, but it did work.
And it was all over.
quickly.
See, I wonder if it didn't work better than today's computer system because there was real communication.
Yeah, it worked real well.
It was kind of a social equation.
It was about the only time that you got together with faculty from other departments.
You weren't exactly together with them, but you were in the same room with them and you'd see them.
In your department, what faculty members were expected to be a part of registration?
I think we all did it.
We took shifts, but I think every one of us did it.
And of course the students
were, some of them were new and they were more confused than we were and they would be looking for, I remember one time somebody stopped by our station and asked, where do you sign up for religion?
And Warble looked around and said, God only knows.
Very good.
During those years when everything was in high gear in the 70s, 80s, early 90s, what was your favorite course to teach?
The beginning course in statistics.
That was my favorite.
Undergraduate?
It was undergraduate, but lots of graduate students took it.
Lots of graduate students did take it.
As many graduates or more graduates than there were undergraduates.
And they were from a wide variety of majors?
Yes, they were.
And over the years, describe the quality of the students that took it.
Did it go up, down, sideways, or what?
stayed the same.
They were all totally ignorant of statistics when they came in and I taught them something but I didn't notice any real differences, real changes.
I mentioned a while ago I did notice, did seem to notice a little improvement when women came in.
I would apply that to statistics also.
I mean it's just the overall, I believe their interest in academics started to
and maybe a little competitiveness started coming in.
But it wasn't a great factor.
We always had good students.
Did the students create a nickname for that course?
Some courses had a nickname.
Was there?
Well, no, not that.
But they did joke about it quite a bit.
And let me see.
I was always emphasizing the concept of significant figures in calculation, probably beat that horse to death, but a lot of people referred to me as, said, Dr. Barker, if you had
call name on the radio, he'd be the significant figure.
Maybe I'd be the last to know though if they had a nickname for it.
Describe how you actually taught the course.
Were you standing, sitting, walking, standing still, what?
In that particular course I was always standing.
I always had a piece of chalk in my hand, and I did use a blackboard quite a bit.
But even if I didn't, just in case, I had the chalk with me.
And I asked a lot of questions, but they were rhetorical questions.
But I did try to anticipate what the questions would be.
And of course, I did have a lot of real questions too.
I guess I would be in motion quite a bit.
I wouldn't stay in exactly the same place.
I had hardly any notes in that course, especially after I'd taught it about a million times, you know.
And I didn't stay in one place necessarily, but I didn't constantly move either.
But I moved to the chalkboard a lot.
Had a lot of dry cleaning bells on my suits from all that chalk.
Normally, how were you dressed?
I always wore a tie, and I almost always wore a jacket, sport jacket of some kind.
Not always pressed too well, but I wore a coat and tie.
In the summer, I would usually wear a short-sleeved shirt and a tie.
Did you give them any?
But I was about the last to do it, you know.
Did you give the students any guidelines as to how you expected them to behave in class?
Well, not so much behave, but I was very specific about what the content would be.
In fact, I gave them homework assignments that were the same as the test from previous years.
And I found out that there were immense files of those available on campus, lots more than I had, you know, thousands of former previous tests.
And since I knew they had them, you know, some had them, I wanted them all to have them.
So I issued to students when they were going to be having a test,
I gave them something just like the next test they're going to take, except the words are different and the numbers are different.
The music's different.
And I even had students frequently ask, may I have some